.TH HIER 7
.SH NAME
hier \- Description of the ELKS file system hierarchy
.SH DESCRIPTION
A tour through the ELKS directory hierarchy. Be aware that many directories and files 
are configuration dependent in order to enable very small images to be created.
.TP
.I /
This is where the whole tree starts, and is called root. The root directory holds
the 
.BR bootopts (5)
file in addition to some or all of the directories listed below.
.TP
.I /bin/
Contains all runnable  programs and scripts. In ELKS
there are no \fB/sbin/\fP, \fB/usr/bin/\fP, \fB/usr/sbin\fP etc. for the simple reason to save 
inodes and directory lookups. This simplicity makes it possible to run 
a reasonably complete system from a 360k floppy disk.
.PP
.nf
	  \fBcat\fP    show files, \fBcat\fP(1)	
	  \fBcp\fP     copy files and directories, \fBcp\fP(1)
	  \fBmount\fP  mount file systems, \fBmount\fP(1) 
	  \fBsh\fP     shell
	  ...
.fi
.TP
.I /dev/
Contains device, block, or other special files. See
.BR mknod (2).	
.PP
.nf
	  \fBconsole\fP computer's console device, \fBtty\fP(4)
	  \fBfd*\fP     floppy disk, \fBfd\fP(4)
	  \fBhd*\fP     hard disk, \fBhd\fP(4)
	  \fBnull\fP    accepts and discards all input; produces no output
	  \fBtty*\fP    terminal device, \fBtty\fP(4)
	  \fBttyS*\fP   serial line, \fBtty\fP(4)
	  \fBzero\fP    the zero device; produces null bytes
	  ...
.fi
.TP
.I /etc/
System configuration and data files.
.PP
.nf
	  \fBgroup\fP   group permissions file
	  \fBhosts\fP   TCP/IP hosts database, \fBhosts\fP(5)
	  \fBmotd\fP    system message of the day, \fBlogin\fP(1)
	  \fBpasswd\fP  user database, \fBpasswd\fP(1) 
	  \fBprofile\fP system wide shell profile
	  \fBrc.sys\fP  system startup script, \fBboot\fP(8)
	  \fBtermcap\fP terminal type descriptions, \fBtermcap\fP(5)
	  \fBinittab\fP processes and lines to enable
				at startup, \fBinittab\fR(5)
	  \fBnet.cfg\fP network settings and defaults
	  \fBmount.cfg\fP filesystems to check and mount at startup
	  ...
.fi
.TP
.I /home/
Contains home directories for users.
.PP
.nf
	  \fBuser1\fP     home directory for user user1
.fi
.TP
.I /mnt/
Mount point for temporarily mounted file system.
.TP
.I /root/
This directory is the home directory for the root user.
.TP
.I /tmp/	
Contains small, short-lived temporary files.
.TP
.I /var/	
On ELKS this directory is optional, present only if the 
.BR httpd (8)
and/or the
.BR crond (8)
daemons
are installed and activated.
.TP
.I /lib/
Contains manual pages in subdirectories according to 
		  	the man page sections. See \fBman\fP(1).

    	\fBman0/\fP	section 0, Book style user commands
    	\fBman1/\fP	user commands
    	\fBman2/\fP	system calls
    	\fBman3/\fP	library routines
    	\fBman4/\fP	device files
    	\fBman5/\fP	file formats
    	\fBman6/\fP	games
    	\fBman7/\fP	miscellaneous
    	\fBman8/\fP	system utilities

.fi

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ls (1),
.BR man (1),
.BR grep (1),
.BR mount (1).
.SH NOTES
Not all of the directories and files shown are present.  They must be
created as needed.
.SH BUGS
Some of the listed manual references do not yet exist.
