.Dd October 16, 2007
.Os ELKS
.Dt CRONTAB 1
.Sh NAME
.Nm crontab
.Nd manage crontab files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl u Ar user
.Op Pa file
.br
.Nm
.Op Fl u Ar user
.Bro
\& 
.Fl l ,
.Fl r ,
.Fl e
\& 
.Brc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility is used to update, delete, or display the
files that
.Xr cron 8
uses to schedule jobs.  If invoked without options,
.Nm
copies the specified file, or the standard input
if no file is specified, into the directory that
holds all the system
.Xr crontabs 5 .
.Pp
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Fl XX
.It Fl e
Edits a copy of the current user's crontab file, or creates an
empty file to edit if their crontab does not exist.  When editing
is complete, the file is install as the user's crontab file.
.Pp The environment variables
.Em \&$EDITOR
and
.Em \&$VISUAL
determines which editor is used
.Po
.Em \&$EDITOR ,
then
.Em \&$VISUAL ,
and if neither of these is defined,
.Em vi
.Pc
.It Fl l
Lists the crontab file for the current user.
.It Fl r
Removes the crontab file for the current user.
.It Fl u Ar user
If you are logged in as the superuser,  you can
use 
.Fl u
to specify a particular user's crontab to update,
delete, or list.
.El
.Sh BUGS
If you inadvertently enter the crontab command with no
arguments, you will lose your existing crontab unless
you exit with a
.Sy Control-C .
.Nm Crontab
attempts to catch this bug by refusing to overwrite a
crontab with an empty one, but it's better to be safe
than sorry.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/var/cron"
.It Pa "/var/cron"
Where 
.Xr cron 8
looks for crontabs.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr crontab 5 ,
.Xr cron 8 .
.Sh AUTHOR
David Parsons (orc@pell.portland.or.us)
