.TH CURL 1
.SH NAME
curl \- transfer data from or to a server using HTTP, FTP or TCP
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBcurl\fR [\fB-ovfT\fR] [\fB-u user:pass\fR] [\fB-d data\fR] [\fB--json\fR] \fIurl\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Curl
transfers data to or from a network server using HTTP, FTP or raw TCP.
The URL must specify the scheme: \fBhttp://\fR, \fBftp://\fR or \fBtcp://\fR.
Data is written to standard output, or to a file with \fB-o\fR.
.SS OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B \-o file
Write output to \fIfile\fR instead of stdout.
.TP 5
.B \-v
Verbose output.  Shows the URL and resolved address on stderr.
For FTP directory listings, produces a long listing.
.TP 5
.B \-u user:pass
Use \fIuser\fR and \fIpassword\fR for server authentication.
For HTTP, this sends a Basic Authorization header.
For FTP, this is used for the USER and PASS commands.
.TP 5
.B \-d data
Use HTTP POST with the given data as the request body.
Sets Content-Type to \fIapplication/x-www-form-urlencoded\fR.
.TP 5
.B \-\-json
Use HTTP POST with Content-Type set to \fIapplication/json\fR.
Must be specified before \fB-d\fR.
.TP 5
.B \-f key
After an HTTP response, extract the top-level JSON value for \fIkey\fR
and print only that value.
.TP 5
.B \-T file
Upload \fIfile\fR to an FTP server using STOR.
.SS URL SCHEMES
.TP 5
.B http://host[:port]/path
HTTP GET (or POST with \fB-d\fR).  Default port 80.
.TP 5
.B ftp://[user:pass@]host[:port]/path[/]
FTP download (RETR) or directory listing (if path ends with /).
Default port 21, anonymous login if no credentials given.
.TP 5
.B tcp://host:port/path
Raw TCP mode.  Connects to host:port, sends path + newline,
then reads the response.  Port is required.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP 20
.B curl http://example.com/index.html
    # Download a web page to stdout
.TP 20
.B curl \-o page.html http://example.com/index.html
    # Download to a file
.TP 20
.B curl \-d "name=test" http://httpbin.org/post
    # HTTP POST with form data
.TP 20
.B curl \-\-json \-d '{"key":"value"}' http://httpbin.org/post
    # HTTP POST with JSON body
.TP 20
.B curl \-f "origin" http://httpbin.org/ip
    # Extract a JSON key from the response
.TP 20
.B curl ftp://ftp.gnu.org/README
    # Download a file via FTP
.TP 20
.B curl ftp://ftp.gnu.org/
    # List an FTP directory
.TP 20
.B curl \-v ftp://ftp.gnu.org/
    # Verbose FTP directory listing
.TP 20
.B curl \-u demo:demo ftp://demo.wftpserver.com
    # FTP download with authentication
.TP 20
.B curl \-T local.txt ftp://server/remote.txt
    # Upload a file via FTP
.TP 20
.B curl tcp://localhost:8080/request
    # Raw TCP: sends "request\\n", prints response
.SH AUTHOR
Derek Johansen
