.TH FM 1
.SH NAME
fm \- file manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fm
[\fBdirectory\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR fm
is a simple and efficient file browser that gets out of your way
as much as possible. It will run on UNIX or ELKS based ANSI v3.64
or xterm-256 terminals, with mouse support.
.PP
.B fm
supports both vi-like and emacs-like key bindings, which are described below:
.SH "KEY BINDINGS"
.nf
Z       Quit.
?       Help.

a-z     Move to matching entry.
0-9     Move to matching entry.

bs      Backup one directory level.
DEL     Backup one directory level.
left    Backup one directory level.

right   Open file or enter directory.
ret     Open file or enter directory.

^N      Move to next entry.
down    Move to next entry.
pagedn  Scroll down half a page.
^D      Scroll down half a page.

^P      Move to previous entry.
up      Move to previous entry.
pageup  Scroll up half a page.
^U      Scroll up half a page.

home    Move to first entry.
^       Move to first entry.
H       Move to first entry.

end     Move to last entry.
$       Move to last entry.
B       Move to last entry.

/       Change filter.
C       Change directory.
~       Change to HOME directory.

D       Toggle sort by directory first.
S       Toggle sort by file size.
T       Toggle sort by time modified.
V       Toggle sort by version number.
.       Toggle hidden .dot files.
I       Toggle case sensitive sort.

^L      Force a redraw.
!       Spawn a shell in the current directory.
E       Open selected entry with the vi editor.
R       Run selected entry.
.fi
.PP
Backing up one directory level will set the cursor position at the
directory you came out of.
.SH FILTERS
Filters allow you to use regexes to display only the matched
entries in the current directory view.
This effectively allows searching through the directory tree
for a particular entry.
.PP
Filters do not stack on top of each other.
They are applied anew every time.
.PP
To reset the filter you can input an empty filter expression.
.PP
If
.BR fm
is invoked as root the default filter will also match hidden files.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The
.BR SHELL
and
.BR EDITOR
environment variables take precedence when dealing with the
! and E
commands respectively. The
.BR PAGER
environment variable can be used to replace
.B more
with your
preferred screen pager (used with right arrow when opening a file).
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Lazaros Koromilas lostd@2f30.org,
Dimitris Papastamos sin@2f30.org
Greg Haerr.
