.TH meminfo 1
.SH NAME
meminfo \- list system memory usage
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B meminfo
.RB [ \-a ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-t ]
.RB [ \-b ]
.br
.SS OPTIONS
Defaults to showing all memory.
.TP 5
.B -a
Show application memory
.TP 5
.B -f
Show free memory
.TP 5
.B -t
Show tty and driver memory
.TP 5
.B -b
Show system buffer and pipe memory
.TP 5
.B -s
Show system task, inode and file memory.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B meminfo
traverses the kernel local heap and displays a line for each in-use or free entry. 
Since the local heap also manages the system memory outside of the kernel
normally available for running application programs, the in-use or free
segments of system memory outside the kernel
(sometimes called external or main memory) will also be displayed.
.PP
For every line, the local heap address, type and size are displayed.
For external memory, the external memory segment, type, size and access count
are also displayed. Each of these are detailed below.
.PP
At the bottom of the listing, the total size and free size of the kernel
local heap are displayed, along with the external (main) memory system total,
used and free space in kilobytes (KB).
.PP
By inspecting the external (main) memory entries, one can determine
how much contiguous memory is available for running additional programs,
as well as the amount of memory used for kernel system buffers, and
application program code and data segments.
.PP
Each line of the listing contains:
.TP 10
HEAP
The kernel local heap address.
.TP 10
TYPE
The type of memory allocated (or free).
.TP 10
SIZE
The size in bytes of the allocated or free local memory.
.PP
For external/main memory (type SEG), the following additional items are displayed:
.TP 10
SEG
The segment address of the external/main memory.
.TP 10
TYPE
What the external/main memory segment is used for (or free).
.TP 10
SIZE
The size in bytes of the allocated or free external/main memory segment.
.TP 10
CNT
The access count (0 is free, >1 is shared).
.SH "LOCAL HEAP TYPES"
Local memory allocation types can be one of the following:
.TP 10
SEG
External (main) memory segment.
.TP 10
TTY
TTY input or output buffer.
.TP 10
DRVR
Direct Floppy or other driver buffers.
.TP 10
BUFH
System buffer headers. The buffer data contents may be in main or XMS memory.
.TP 10
PIPE
Open pipe buffer.
.TP 10
TASK
Kernel per process data structure.
.TP 10
INOD
System inodes.
.TP 10
FILE
System open files.
.TP 10
free
Unallocated memory in the local heap.
.SH "EXTERNAL (MAIN) MEMORY TYPES"
Main memory allocation types can be one of the following:
.TP 10
CSEG
Running application code segment.
.TP 10
DSEG
Running application data segment.
.TP 10
BUF
Block subsystem buffer data, 1024 bytes per buffer.
.TP 10
RDSK
Ramdisk data.
.TP 10
free
Unallocated main memory.
.SH FILES
.TP 10
.B /dev/kmem
.SH BUGS
.B meminfo
does not yet display XMS memory usage.
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Haerr (greg@censoft.com)
