.TH ps 1
.SH NAME
ps \- list processes or uptime status
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ps
[\fB-lu\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR ps
prints a list of all the processes currently running on the system, giving
a line for each process. The process id, process group, tty, user, state,
CPU percentage utilization,
process heap total and free, overall process memory size, and the process name
and command line are displayed.
The kernel code an data segment address of the corresponding binary are also
displayed when the
.B -l
option is used.
The
.B uptime
command is linked to
.BR ps.
.PP
Each line of the listing contains:
.TP 10
PID
The process ID.
.TP 10
GRP
The process group.
.TP 10
TTY
The controlling TTY.
.TP 10
USER
The user ID.
.TP 10
STAT
Process status (see below).
.TP 10
CPU
CPU % utilization.
.TP 10
CSEG
Code segment in main memory in hex.
.TP 10
DSEG
Data segment in main memory in hex.
.TP 10
HEAP
Current heap used (decimal).
.TP 10
FREE
Remaining heap and stack space available (decimal).
.TP 10
SIZE
Total main memory used in bytes.
.TP 10
COMMAND
Program name and arguments.
.SS OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-l
Display DSEG and CSEG columns.
.TP
.B \-u
Display system uptime.
.SH "PROCESS STATES"
Process states are from the following table:
.TP 10
R
Running
.TP 10
S
Interruptible sleeping
.TP 10
s
Uninterruptible sleeping
.TP 10
T
Stopped
.TP 10
Z
Zombie
.TP 10
E
Exiting
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.I 0
Process table read successfully.
.TP
.I 1
Unable to access 
.I /dev/kmem
or could not read task entries.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP
.B /dev/kmem
.sp
.SH AUTHORS
Al Riddoch (ajr@ecs.soton.ac.uk)
.br
Greg Haerr (greg@censoft.com)
