.TH TCPDUMP 1
.SH NAME
tcpdump \- display network traffic via ktcp netconf protocol
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBtcpdump\fR [\fB\-c\fR \fIcount\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Tcpdump
connects to the ktcp TCP/IP stack and displays network packets on
standard output.  Packets are printed with a direction indicator,
protocol type, source and destination addresses, and transport
protocol port numbers.
.PP
.B Tcpdump
captures all packets seen by ktcp, including ARP, IP, ICMP, TCP, and
UDP traffic.  It runs until interrupted by SIGINT (Ctrl-C) or until
the specified number of packets have been captured.
.SS OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B \-c \fIcount\fR
Exit after capturing \fIcount\fR packets.
.SS OUTPUT FORMAT
Each captured packet is printed on a single line:
.TP 20
.B IN
or
.B OUT
Packet direction relative to this host.
.TP 20
.B IP \fIsrc\fR > \fIdst\fR
IP packet with source and destination addresses.
.TP 20
.B TCP \fIsrcport\fR > \fIdstport\fR
TCP segment with source and destination ports (shown after IP line).
.TP 20
.B UDP \fIsrcport\fR > \fIdstport\fR
UDP datagram with source and destination ports.
.TP 20
.B ICMP \fItype\fR
ICMP message type (echo request, echo reply, time exceeded).
.TP 20
.B ARP
ARP packet with who-has or is-at details.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP 20
.B tcpdump
.BR
    # Display all network traffic until interrupted
.TP 20
.B tcpdump \-c 10
.BR
    # Capture exactly 10 packets and exit
.SH NOTES
.B Tcpdump
requires the ktcp TCP/IP stack to be running.  It communicates with
ktcp via the netconf protocol on port 2.
.PP
Backgrounding
.B tcpdump
with
.B &
and running another command such as
.BR urlget (1)
or
.BR ping (1)
allows observing their network traffic live.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR urlget (1),
.BR ping (1),
.BR netstat (1).
.SH AUTHOR
The ELKS project.
