.\" Copyright (c) 1983 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.  The Berkeley software License Agreement
.\" specifies the terms and conditions for redistribution.
.\"
.\"	@(#)telnet.1c	6.5 (Berkeley) 5/10/86
.\"
.TH TELNET 1
.UC 5
.SH NAME
telnet \- user interface to the \s-1TELNET\s0 protocol
.SH SYNOPSIS
telnet [
.I host
[
.I port
] ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Telnet
is used to communicate with another host using the
.B TELNET
protocol.
If 
.I telnet
is invoked without arguments, it enters command mode,
indicated by its prompt (\*(lqtelnet>\*(rq).
In this mode, it accepts and executes the commands listed below.
If it is invoked with arguments, it performs an
.B open
command (see below) with those arguments.
.PP
Once a connection has been opened,
.I telnet
enters an input mode.
The input mode entered will be either \*(lqcharacter at a time\*(rq
or \*(lqline by line\*(rq
depending on what the remote system supports.
.PP
In \*(lqcharacter at a time\*(rq mode, most
text typed is immediately sent to the remote host for processing.
.PP
In \*(lqline by line\*(rq mode, all text is echoed locally,
and (normally) only completed lines are sent to the remote host.
The \*(lqlocal echo character\*(rq (initially \*(lq^E\*(rq) may be used
to turn off and on the local echo
(this would mostly be used to enter passwords
without the password being echoed).
.PP
In either mode, if the
.I localchars
toggle is TRUE (the default in line mode; see below),
the user's
.IR quit ,
.IR intr ,
and
.I flush
characters are trapped locally, and sent as
.B TELNET
protocol sequences to the remote side.
There are options (see
.B toggle
.I autoflush
and
.B toggle
.I autosynch
below)
which cause this action to flush subsequent output to the terminal
(until the remote host acknowledges the
.B TELNET
sequence) and flush previous terminal input
(in the case of
.I quit
and
.IR intr ).
.SH BUGS
.PP
There is no adequate way for dealing with flow control.
.PP
On some remote systems, echo has to be turned off manually when in
\*(lqline by line\*(rq mode.
.PP
In \*(lqline by line\*(rq mode, the terminal's
.I eof
character is only recognized (and sent to the remote system)
when it is the first character on a line.
