.TH URLGET 1
.SH NAME
urlget, ftpget, httpget - retrieve a file from the internet to stdout
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBurlget\fR [\fB-h\fR] [\fB-d\fR] [\fB-p\fR] url

\fBhttpget\fR [\fB-h\fR] [\fB-d\fR] [\fB-p\fR] host[:port] path

\fBftpget\fR host [\fB-v\fR] path[/] [user[pass]]

\fBftpput\fR host path [user[pass]]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Urlget
gets a file specified by a URL and copies it to standard output.

.B Ftpget
similarly gets a file from a conventional ftp server, a login name
and password can be specified.

.B Httpget
is similar to  urlget,  but  the  host  and  path  are  specified
separately without a scheme, as with ftpget.
.SS OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B \-h
show the status line and MIME header from the server.
.TP 5
.B \-d
discard the file body.
.TP 5
.B \-p
use POST method, otherwise use GET.
.TP 5
.B \-U
Act as urlget.
.TP 5
.B \-F
Act as ftpget.
.TP 5
.B \-P
Act as ftpput.
.TP 5
.B \-H
Act as httpget.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP 20
.B urlget http://minix1.woodhull.com/pub/contrib/file.tar.Z > file.tar.Z
    # Download file.tar.Z
.TP 20
.B ftpget minix1.woodhull.com /pub/contrib/README.txt > README.txt
.BR
    # Get a file from an anonymous ftp server
.TP 20
.B httpget -dh minix1.woodhull.com/index.html
.BR
    # Inspect the header of a web page
.TP 20
.SH NOTES
These commands execute the  same  binary  under  different  names.  These
commands  provide  a  lightweight  non-interactive command-line method of
downloading a file or inspecting the status of a web page. Data retrieved
are written to standard output.
.SH AUTHOR
     Michael Temari <Michael@TemWare.Com>
