.TH DHCP 8
.SH NAME
dhcp \- DHCP client implementation in ktcp
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ktcp
.RI [ -d ]
.RI [ local_ip ]
.RI [ gateway ]
.RI [ netmask ]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B DHCP
is a client side implementation of the DHCP protocol.
It automatically negotiates an IP address, netmask, and default gateway
from a local DHCP server at startup.
.PP
DHCP is enabled automatically when
.B LOCALIP
is not set in the environment,
.B /bootopts ,
or passed to ktcp.
To force DHCP even when a local IP is configured, use the
.B \-d
flag.
.SH CONFIGURATION
DHCP behavior is controlled by environment variables set in
.B /bootopts
or
.BR /etc/profile .
.PP
When
.B LOCALIP
is set, ktcp uses that address and DHCP is disabled.
When
.B LOCALIP
is not set, ktcp enables DHCP and negotiates an address.
.PP
The
environment variables
.BR LOCALIP ,
.BR GATEWAY ,
and
.BR NETMASK
are passed to ktcp by the
.B /bin/net
script.
If
.B LOCALIP
is not set, DHCP will be used.
.SH STATE MACHINE
The client follows the standard DHCP exchange:
.PP
.RS
.nf
DISCOVER \(-> OFFER \(-> REQUEST \(-> ACK \(-> BOUND
.fi
.RE
.PP
1. Sends a broadcast DISCOVER on UDP port 67.
.br
2. Receives OFFER from a DHCP server.
.br
3. Sends a REQUEST for the offered address.
.br
4. Receives ACK and applies the lease (IP, netmask, gateway).
.PP
If a NAK is received at any stage, the client restarts from DISCOVER with a new
transaction ID.
.SH RETRY
Exponential backoff is used for retries:
.IP \(bu 2
Initial timeout: 4 ticks
.IP \(bu 2
Doubles each retry, capped at 16 ticks
.IP \(bu 2
After 5 failed retries, restarts from INIT
.PP
Once the address is bound, the retry timer is disabled.
.SH OPTIONS REQUESTED
The client requests the following DHCP options:
.IP \(bu 2
Subnet mask (option 1)
.IP \(bu 2
Router / default gateway (option 3)
.IP \(bu 2
DNS server (option 6)
.IP \(bu 2
Lease time (option 51)
.SH "UDP IMPLEMENTATION"
DHCP uses the UDP layer built into ktcp.
UDP provides a lightweight, connectionless transport on top of IP.
Unlike TCP, there is no handshake or reliable delivery; packets are sent
and received directly.
.SS Sending
A UDP send constructs an 8-byte header (source port, destination port,
length, zeroed checksum) and passes the packet to the IP layer.
The IP layer adds its header and hands the packet to the appropriate
network driver (Ethernet or SLIP).
.SS Receiving
When an incoming IP packet has protocol 0x11 (UDP), the IP layer calls
.BR udp_process (),
which looks up the destination port in a table of registered sockets.
Each registered socket has a callback function; when a matching port is
found, the callback is invoked with the IP header, source port, and
payload data.
If no socket is registered for the destination port, an ICMP
port-unreachable message is sent back.
.SS Registration
A subsystem (like DHCP) registers a port and callback via
.BR udp_register ()
before sending any packets.
This reserves one of the 4 available UDP socket slots
.RB ( MAX_UDP_SOCKS ).
The DHCP client registers port 68 and receives all replies in its
.BR dhcp_input ()
callback.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B /bootopts
Boot options file.
Set
.B LOCALIP=
to use a static address, or leave unset for DHCP.
.TP
.B /etc/net.cfg
Network configuration file sourced by
.BR /bin/net .
Contains default values for
link type and daemons to auto-launch.
.TP
.B /bin/net
Network startup script that starts ktcp with the configured options.
.SH EXAMPLES
To use DHCP, leave
.B LOCALIP
unset in /bootopts and start networking:
.PP
.RS
.nf
net start ne0
.fi
.RE
.PP
To use a static address, set it in /bootopts:
.PP
.RS
.nf
LOCALIP=192.168.1.100
GATEWAY=192.168.1.1
NETMASK=255.255.255.0
.fi
.RE
.SH NOTES
Only one DHCP client can run per interface.
The client uses UDP port 68 and does not renew the lease before expiry.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ifconfig (8),
.BR ktcp (8).
