.TH SYS 8
.SH NAME
sys \- transfer ELKS to a new device or partition
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBsys\fP [\fB\-M|F\fP] [\fB\-3\fP] \fIdevice\fR
.br
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B \-M
Add a ELKS MBR (Master Boot Record) to the target drive.
.TP 5
.B \-F
Create a 'flat' (unpartitioned) device. 
.TP 5
.B \-3
Create a minimal system for a 360K floppy.
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBsys\fR uses the currently running system to build a complete and bootable ELKS partition or drive. 
The common case would be to boot ELKS from a floppy disk and build a hard disk based system 
from there with a single command, such as
.sp
.B # sys -M /dev/hda1
.PP
If the 
.B \-M
option is included, the ELKS MBR will replace the current MBR - if any - on the target drive.
.PP
.B sys
will report progress as it runs, which will take some time if the system is running off of a floppy disk.
Unless the 
.B \-3 
option is present, the entire system with 
.I /bin
and
.I /etc
directories will be copied and the device directory will be fully populated. With
.B \-3
only a subset suitable for very small floppy disks will be transferred.
.PP
The target file system - Minix of FAT - must exist before 
.B sys
can be run.
.PP
After running 
.B sys
successfully, the target drive/partition will be bootable and configured exactly like the source system.
The next step could then be to use the
.B setup 
command to set the hostname and basic parameters (see the
.B setup
man-page for details).
.SH BUGS
.B sys
performs limited option checking, so some error messages appear to come from 
.B makeboot
instead.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR makeboot (8),
.BR setup (8),
.BR mkfs (8),
.BR minix (8),
.BR FAT (8),
.BR MBR (8),
.BR boot (8).
