.TH WD 4
.SH NAME
wd0 \- Driver for the wd/smc 8003 and 8013 ISA Ethernet controller family
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
wd8003, wd8013
	/bootopts: wd0=11,0x300,0xcc00,0x80
	/dev/wd0 - major: 9 minor: 1
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBwd0\fP 
device refers to the ELKS driver for the wd8003/8013 family of 10Mbps 
Ethernet interfaces (aka NICs) running
on the PC ISA 8 or 16 bit bus. The 
\fBwd8013\fP
has a full width 16 bit (double) edge connector an may be used in 16 or 8 bit modes. The
.B wd8003
has a single, 8bit wide edge connector and is an 8 bit only device.
.PP
The driver will attempt to recognize the type of controller and adjust settings accordingly. 
The actual settings will be displayed at boot time. If autodetection does not work, all settings
may be overridden via the 
.I /bootopts
file.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The default settings for the interface are set in the
.I ports.h 
file in the ELKS source tree, see the FILES section below. These settings may conveniently
be overridden at boot-time via the
.I /bootopts
file using the syntax shown in the SYNOPSIS section above.
.PP
The first parameter is the IRQ (decimal), 
the second is the base I/O port address (in hexadecimal), the third is the shared memory
address (also hexadecimal) and the fourth is the 
\fIflag\fP
field described below. Any of the parameters may be omitted and the defaults from 
.I ports.h
will be used. The commas must be kept.
.SH FLAGS
The 
.I flags 
part of the configuration line enables/disables various interface and driver parameters at boot time.
These parameters vary slightly from one interface type/vendor to the next, so make sure to 
look at the correct man page to get correct information.
.PP
The defaults are:
.nf
	Bus width:	Autodetect
	Buffer size:	8k
	Verbose msgs:	Off
.fi
.PP
As distributed, the settings in the 
.I /bootopts
file set the verbose flag (0x80) in the flags field to aid debugging.
.PP
.nf
	NAME		VALUE	FUNCTION
	ETHF_8BIT_BUS   0x10    Force  8 bit bus
	ETHF_16BIT_BUS  0x20    Force 16 bit bus (currently unused)
	ETHF_VERBOSE    0x80    Turn on console error messages
.fi

.SH TROUBLESHOOTING
When the \fBne0\fP
interface has been configured into the running kernel via
\fImenuconfig\fP,
a boot message will indicate whether the configuration works or not. The following message indicates success:
.PP
.nf
eth: wd0 at 0x320, irq 11, ram 0xcc00, (wd8013) MAC 00:00:C0:BC:8F:4B, 
						flags 0x80
.fi
.PP
The interface was found at the specified I/O address, the shared memory address works and
the displayed MAC (Ethernet) address was found and set. 
The interrupt line (IRQ) is reported but not tested or activated at this point. If the interface does 
not seem to work, the IRQ may be wrong.  
If the interface has several connection options (AUI, BNC and/or TP), the card may need to 
be configured specifically for the connection type in use.
.PP
If the interface is reported as 'not found' it is likely that the I/O address is wrong. 
.PP
.nf
eth: wd0 at 0x320, irq 11, ram 0xcc00 not found
.fi
.PP
Check the configuration again – in particular the IRQ and the shared memory address.
On most reasonably modern NICs this means firing 
up a configuration utility under MSDOS to do so called 'soft configuration'. 
Older NICs are configured via physical jumpers,
some have both, one jumper setting indicating 'soft configuration'. Make sure that the shared
memory address is used by other ISA interfaces.
.PP
If the interface seems to work  or partly work but emit error messages while 
transferring data, make sure you set the
.I verbose
flag in the 
.I /bootopts 
configuration to get as much detail as possible about what's going on. 
Refer to the FLAGS and ERROR MESSAGES sections
for details.
.SH 16 VS 8 BIT
The  most significant difference between the 
.B wd8003
and the
.B wd8013
is the bus width. The former supports the original PC/XT ISA 8 bit bus, the latter 
uses the PC/AT 16 bit ISA bus. Unlike the 
.I ne1k/ne2k
family of interfaces, the 
.I wd
series use the same 8K buffer regardless of bus width. Cards with more buffer space do exist,
but the increased buffer is not recognized by this driver.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The driver may emit the following error messages, some of them only if the verbose flag has been set.
.PP
.nf
\fIwd0: Damaged packet, hdr 0x%x %u, buffer cleared\fR
.fi
A damaged packet was found in the NICs buffer and is discarded, which will cause a retransmit
if the packet was part of a TCP session. Since the NIC is programmed to discard 
erroneous packets automatically, this should not happen, and may - if it happens 
more than once - indicate a hardware malfunction.
.PP
.nf
\fIeth: mismatched read page pointers %2x vs %2x.\fR
.fi
This should never happen and indicates either a driver bug or a physical hardware problem.
Contact the ELKS support community if you see this error.
.PP
.nf
\fIwd0: Rcv oflow (0x%x), keep %d\fR
.fi
The interface was unable to handle the amount of incoming traffic and had to discard one or more packets.
Since incoming packets are transferred directly from the interface buffer to user space,
with no buffering by the operating system, this may occur regularly when under heavy load. 
If it happens in light load conditions, it may indicate a hardware or network media problem.
The first number displayed is a status code from the NIC, of interest to the developers. 
The second number indicates how many packets are retained in the NIC buffer after the 
'cleanup process'.
.PP
.nf
\fIwd0: TX-error, status 0x%x\fR
.fi
A link level error happened during transmit. This should not happen and may 
indicate a physical problem with the network. In rare cases it may be an indication that
the network is really busy. Keep in mind that these interfaces are 10Mbps, more often than 
not connected to a switch carrying Fast Ethernet (100Mbps) or Gigabit Ethernet traffic. The broadcast
traffic on such segments may have bursts that the old interfaces have a hard time keeping up with.
This message is informational.
.PP
.nf
\fIwd0: RX-error, status 0x%x\fR
.fi
A link level error happened during receive. This should not happen but may occur 
under heavy load. The message is informational and will not show unless the verbose-flag is set.
.PP
.nf
\fIwd0: Bogus packet: status %#x nxpg %#x size %d\fR
.fi
A unusual status code was set by the NIC related to a received packet. This should not 
happen, and would be of great interest to developers.
.PP
.nf
\fIwd0: Unable to use IRQ %d (errno %d)\fR
.fi
An interface is already using this  IRQ. 
Network and other ISA interfaces are configured during boot, but the IRQ is assigned at runtime,
when the actual interface is opened. Hence, it's OK to see several interfaces reporting 
the same IRQ at boot time.
However, if the IRQ is already taken when a device is opened, this error message will be emitted.
The conflict may be remedied by closing the offending device, but since the ISA bus does not
provide any standardized mechanism for releasing IRQs, it may be necessary to reboot in order to
reassign an IRQ.

.SH IOCTLs
The driver supports the following IOCTL calls:
.PP
.nf
	NAME		     PARAMETER		PURPOSE
	IOCTL_ETH_ADDR_GET   char[6]		Get MAC address
	IOCTL_ETH_ADDR_SET   char[6]		Set MAC address
	IOCTL_ETH_GETSTAT    struct netif_stat	Get stats from device
.fi
.PP
The 
.I ADDR_SET
ioctl is currently unused and disabled.

.SH FILES
/dev/wd0, /bootopts, /etc/net.cfg, elks/include/arch/ports.h
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ktcp (8),
.BR ne0 (4),
.BR 3c0 (4),
.BR net (8),
.BR bootopts (5).
.SH AUTHOR
Adapted from the ELKS ne2k driver by @pawosm-arm (2020), expanded and partly 
rewritten by @mellvik (2022).
