.TH MOUNT 2
.SH NAME
mount, umount \- mount or umount a file system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ft B
.nf
#include <sys/mount.h>

int mount(char *\fIspecial\fP, char *\fIname\fP, int \fItype\fP, int \fIflags\fP)
int umount(char *\fIname\fP)
.fi
.ft P
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Mount()
tells the system that the file system
.I special
is to be mounted on the file
.IR name ,
effectively overlaying
.I name
with the file tree on
.IR special .
.I Name
may of any type, except that if the root of
.I special
is a directory, then
.I name
must also be a directory.
.I Special
must be a block special file.
.PP
.I Flags
may be a bitwise combination of the following flags:
.TP 2
.B MS_RDONLY
Mount file system read-only, rather than read-write.
.TP
.B MS_REMOUNT
Alter the flats of a mounted filesystem.
.TP
.B MS_AUTOMOUNT
Auto-mount filesystem by based on reading the superblock.
.PP
.I Type
is the type of the file system from the following list.
If this parameter is 0, the default type is used.
.TP 2
.B FST_MINIX
A MINIX v1 filesystem (default).
.TP
.B FST_MSDOS
An MSDOS (FAT) filesystem.
.TP
.B FST_ROMFS
A ROM filesystem.
.PP
.B Umount()
removes the connection between a device and a mount point,
.I name
may refer to either of them.  If more than one device is mounted on the
same mount point then unmounting at the mount point removes the last mounted
device, unmounting a device removes precisely that device.  The unmount will
only succeed if none of the files on the device are in use.
.PP
These calls may only be executed by the super-user.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mount (1),
.BR umount (1).
